TITLE: Trotline — Passive Multi-Hook Fishing System
CAT: L2
SUB: fishing_hunting_knowledge
TAGS: trotline,fishing,passive,hooks,survival-fishing
REGION: global,temperate
CONFIDENCE: high
---

[SUMMARY]
A trotline is a long fishing line with multiple baited hooks — the passive fishing equivalent of setting multiple snares. Fish while you sleep. One trotline with 10-25 hooks dramatically outperforms rod-and-line fishing for survival calorie gathering.

[STEPS]
1. MAIN LINE: use the strongest line available — paracord (550 lb), bankline (#36 or heavier), heavy monofilament (50+ lb test), or twisted natural cordage. Length: 20-100 feet depending on water width. The main line stretches across or along the water body.
2. DROP LINES (gangions): tie short lines (12-18 inches) to the main line every 3-5 feet. Use lighter line than the main line so a big fish breaks the drop line, not the whole trotline. Attach hooks to drop lines.
3. HOOKS: use circle hooks if available (self-setting, fish can't throw them). Otherwise, any hook works. Improvised hooks: thorns, bent pins/nails, carved bone/hardwood hooks, safety pins, soda can tabs bent into hooks. Size 2-6 for panfish, 1/0-3/0 for catfish/larger species.
4. ANCHORING: tie one end to a tree, root, or stake on the bank. Run line across the water and anchor the far end to another tree, heavy rock, or driven stake. For river fishing: angle the line downstream at 30-45°, not perpendicular to current.
5. DEPTH: adjust drop line length so hooks hang just above the bottom (where most food fish feed). In still water, use small stones as sinkers on each drop line. Hooks should be 6-12 inches above the bottom.
6. BAIT: use local bait — worms (dig near water's edge), grubs (under rotting logs), grasshoppers, crawfish tails, cut fish (catch one small fish and cut it up), liver, or dough balls (flour + water mixed to paste). Different hooks with different bait types increases catch variety.
7. SET AND CHECK: set trotline at dusk (most fish feed at night). Check at dawn. Reset and rebait any empty hooks. Check again at mid-day. Minimum two checks per day in warm weather — spoilage is rapid.
8. FLOAT LINE VARIATION: for open water (ponds, lakes), tie the main line between two floating jugs/bottles. Anchor with a heavy rock on a long line from the center. Hooks hang below the floats at varying depths. This targets suspended fish, not just bottom feeders.
9. LIMB LINES (simplified trotline): tie a single hook-and-line to flexible branches overhanging water. The branch acts as a spring, fighting the fish and keeping tension. Set 10-20 limb lines along a creek bank. Less gear-intensive than a full trotline.
10. PROCESSING CATCH: kill fish immediately with a blow to the head. Gut by slitting belly from vent to gills, remove all organs. In hot weather, cook or smoke immediately. In cool weather, keep in cool water (on a stringer) until ready to process. Save fish heads and guts as bait for next set.

[WARNINGS]
! Check trotlines every few hours — fish die quickly on hooks and spoil in warm water
! Trotlines across navigable waterways are illegal in many jurisdictions outside survival situations
! Strong current can sweep your entire line away — anchor both ends securely
! Catfish and turtles on trotlines can bite — handle with care, grip behind the head

[RELATED]
> l2-fishing-improvised-methods
> l2-fishing-knots
> l2-fish-identification-freshwater

[SOURCES]
@ fm-21-76-survival